
3

Automatic Zoom
Exercise 1 – Lexical Analysis
Compilation 0368-3133
Due 13/11/2025, 23:59
1 Assignment Overview
During the semester we will implement a compiler for an object oriented language called L. The first exercise
implements a lexical scanner based on the open source tool JFlex. The input for the scanner is a single text
file containing a L program, and the output is a text file containing a tokenized representation of the input.
The exercise repository contains a simple skeleton program, and you are encouraged to work your way up
from there.
2 Tokens and Lexical Rules
Token Name Description Token Name Description
LPAREN ( ASSIGN :=
RPAREN ) EQ =
LBRACK [ LT <
RBRACK ] GT >
LBRACE { ARRAY array
RBRACE } CLASS class
PLUS + RETURN return
MINUS − WHILE while
TIMES ∗ IF if
DIVIDE / ELSE else
COMMA , NEW new
DOT . EXTENDS extends
SEMICOLON ; NIL nil
TYPE INT int INT(value) value is an integer
TYPE STRING string STRING(value) value is a string
TYPE VOID void ID(value) value is an identifier
Table 1: Tokens in L.
Table 1 contains the list of valid tokens in L along with their names.
• Identifiers: Start with a letter and may contain only letters and digits.
• Keywords: Cannot be used as identifiers. Reserved keywords of L:
class, nil, array, while, int, void, extends, return, new, if, else, string
• Integers: Sequences of digits. Integers should not have leading zeroes, and when they do, it is a
lexical error. Though integers are stored as 32-bit values in memory, they are artificially limited in
L to 16-bit signed values between 0 and 215 −1. Integers out of this range are lexical errors.
1
• Strings: Sequences of (zero or more) letters between double quotes. Strings that contain non-letter
characters are lexical errors. Unclosed strings are lexical errors too.
• White spaces: Consist of spaces, tabs and newline characters. They may appear between any tokens.
• Comments Similar to those used in the C programming language, but may only contain characters
from Figure 2. There are two types of comments in L. Comments (of both types) that contain
characters that do not appear in Figure 2 are lexical errors.
– Type-1 Comment: A sequence of characters that begins with // followed by any character from
Figure 2 up to the first occurrence of a newline character. Note, for example, that //a$ is not
considered as a Type-1 comment, where $ denotes the special end-of-input symbol.
– Type-2 Comment: A sequence of characters that begins with /* followed by any characters from
Figure 2, up to the first occurrence of the end sequence */. An unclosed Type-2 comment (that
is, a missing */) is a lexical error. For example, the input /*a is a lexical error, but a*/ is valid.
letters, digits, white spaces, (, ), [, ], {, }, ?, !, +, -, *, /, ., ;
Figure 2: Characters that may appear inside comments in L. Note: Commas are used only to separate the
characters. “white spaces” refers to the definition given above.
3 Input and Output
Input: A single text file containing a L program.
Output: A text file containing a tokenized representation of the input program. Each token should appear
in a separate line, with: (1) the token name, (2) line number it appeared on, and (3) character position inside
the line. Three types of tokens are associated with corresponding values: integers, identifiers and strings. The
printing format for all tokens can be deduced from the examples in Table 3. White spaces and comments are
ignored and produce no output. Whenever the input program contains a lexical error, the output file should
contain a single word only: ERROR. A lexical error occurs if a sequence of characters cannot be matched
to any token according to the lexical analysis algorithm presented in class, or if any of the lexical errors
described in this document occur.
Printed Lines Examples Description
LPAREN[7,8] left parenthesis is encountered in line 7, character position 8
INT(74)[3,8] integer 74 is encountered in line 3, character position 8
STRING(“Dan”)[2,5] string “Dan” is encountered in line 2, character position 5
ID(numPts)[1,6] identifier numPts is encountered in line 1, character position 6
Table 3: Printing format for the first exercise. Each line in the output text file should contain the token
name, the line number they appeared on, and the character position inside that line. Tokens with associated
values (integers, identifiers, and strings) should include the value in parentheses, as shown.
4 Submission Guidelines
Each group should have only one student submit the solution via the course Moodle. Submit all your code
in a single zip file named <ID>.zip, where <ID> is the ID of the submitting student. The zip file must have
the following structure at the top level:
2
1. A text file named ids.txt containing the IDs of all team members (one ID per line).
2. A folder named ex1/ containing all your source code.
Inside the ex1 folder, include a makefile at ex1/Makefile. This makefile must build your source files
into the lexer, which should be a runnable jar file located at ex1/LEXER (note the lack of .jar suffix). You
may reuse the makefile provided in the skeleton, or create a new one if you prefer.
Command-line usage: LEXER receives 2 parameters (file paths):
• input (input file path)
• output (output file path containing the expected output)
Self-check script: Before submitting, you must run the self-check script provided with this exercise.
This script verifies that your source code compiles successfully using your makefile and passes several
provided tests. You must execute the self-check on your submission zip file within the school server
(nova.cs.tau.ac.il) and ensure that your submission passes all checks. Follow these steps:
1. Download self-check-ex1.zip from the course Moodle and place it in the same directory as your
submission zip file. Make sure no other files are present in that directory.
2. Run the following commands:
unzip self-check-ex1.zip
python self-check.py
Make sure that your ids.txt file follows the required format, and that your makefile does not contain
hard-coded paths. The self-check script does not verify these aspects automatically and you are responsible
for ensuring that your code compiles correctly in any directory.
Submissions that fail to compile or do not produce the required runnable will receive a
grade of 0, and resubmissions will not be allowed.
5 Starter Code
The exercise skeleton can be found in the repository for this exercise. The skeleton provides a basic lexical
scanner, which you may modify as needed. Some files of interest in the provided skeleton:
• jflex/LEX FILE.lex (LEX configuration file)
• src/TokenNames.java (enum with token types)
• src/Main.java
• The input and expected output folders contain input tests and their expected results.
To use the skeleton, run the following command (in the ex1 directory):
$make
This performs the following steps:
• Generates src/Lexer.java from the LEX file
• Compiles the modules into LEXER
• Runs LEXER on input/Input.txt
3
